---
title: "Trends in Well-Child Visits with Out-of-Pocket Costs in the US Before and After the Affordable Care Act"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/well-child-visits
excerpt: '(with Paul Shafer and Heather Hsu). This brief report examines the impact of the ACA's provision reducing cost-sharing for preventive services on the utilization and cost of pediatric wellness visits. We find that following the implementation of the ACA, privately-insured children increased their utilization of well-child care, and the proportion of families incurring out-of-pocket costs for this care declined. However, approximately 1 in 7 well-child visits continues to result in an out-of-pocket cost.'
date: 2021-03-12
venue: 'JAMA Network Open'
paperurl: 'http://alex-hoagland.github.io/files/Shafer_Hoagland_Hsu_2021.pdf'
---
---
title: "Trends in Well-Child Visits with Out-of-Pocket Costs in the US Before and After the Affordable Care Act"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/well-child-visits
excerpt: '(with Paul Shafer and Heather Hsu). This brief report examines the impact of the ACA's provision reducing cost-sharing for preventive services on the utilization and cost of pediatric wellness visits. We find that following the implementation of the ACA, privately-insured children increased their utilization of well-child care, and the proportion of families incurring out-of-pocket costs for this care declined. However, approximately 1 in 7 well-child visits continues to result in an out-of-pocket cost.'
date: 2021-03-12
venue: 'JAMA Network Open'
paperurl: 'http://alex-hoagland.github.io/files/Shafer_Hoagland_Hsu_2021.pdf'
---

(with Paul Shafer and Heather Hsu) 

This is a brief report examining the impact of the ACA's popular provision reducing cost-sharing for preventive services on the utilization and cost of pediatric wellness visits. We find that following passage of the ACA, engagement of privately insured children in well-child care increased
and the proportion of families incurring out-of-pocket costs for this care declined. However, approximately 1 of 7 wellness visits still results in out-of-pocket costs.

[Read the full paper here!](http://alex-hoagland.github.io/files/Shafer_Hoagland_Hsu_2021.pdf)

Recommended citation: Shafer PR, Hoagland A, Hsu HE. Trends in Well-Child Visits With Out-of-Pocket Costs in the US Before and After the Affordable Care Act. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4(3):e211248. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.1248
